JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES:
We can choose to press forward
with a better
model of cooperation and
integration, or we
can retreat into a world sharply
divided.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
gives his final
speech at the U.N. General
Assembly, facing
a historic refugee crisis and
struggling cease-fire
in Syria.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: The CEO
of Wells Fargo apologizes for
millions of
fraudulent accounts, but says
the practice
wasn't a scheme.
JOHN STUMPF, CEO, Wells Fargo &
Company: We
never directed nor wanted our
team members
to provide products and services
to customers
that they didn't want.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And exploring the
presidential
candidates' plans on education.
We continue our series looking
at the issues
shaping the election.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the president
today, a
moment on the world stage at the
United Nations
one last time, his message no
less than an
urgent plea to make a better
world.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
At this moment, we all face a
choice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was his final
address to
the U.N. General Assembly, and
President Obama
used it to issue a challenge.
BARACK OBAMA: We can choose to
press forward
with a better model of
cooperation and integration,
or we can retreat into a world
sharply divided
and ultimately in conflict along
age-old lines
of nation and tribe and race and
religion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
spoke of a growing
contest between authoritarian
rule and liberalism,
and of people losing faith in
the face of
terrorism and the refugee
crises.
BARACK OBAMA: Given the
difficulty in forging
true democracy in the face of
these pressures,
it's no surprise that some argue
the future
favors the strong man, a
top-down model, rather
than strong democratic
institutions.
But I believe this thinking is
wrong.
I believe the road of true
democracy remains
the better path.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Obama
appealed to the world
to do more for the millions
fleeing war-torn
countries.
And he warned against the
politics of Donald
Trump, without mentioning the
Republican nominee
by name.
BARACK OBAMA: The world is too
small for us
to simply be able to build a
wall and prevent
it from affecting our own
societies.
MAN: The prime minister of the
United Kingdom.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Newly named
British Prime Minister
Theresa May, making her first
address at the
U.N. after her country's vote to
leave the
European Union, said Brexit was
not a signal
that Britain was retreating from
its global
responsibilities.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: They
didn't vote to turn inward or
walk away from
any of our partners in the
world.
Faced with challenges like
migration, they
demanded a politics that is more
in touch
with their concerns and bold
action to address
them.
But that action must be more
global, not less.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But for many
leaders, Syria
topped the agenda.
President Obama aimed strong
criticism at
the Syrians' main ally, Russia,
for its aggressive
moves there and in Ukraine.
BARACK OBAMA: In a world that
left the age
of empire behind, we see Russia
attempting
to recover lost glory through
force.
It may fuel nationalist fervor
for a time,
but, over time, it's also going
to diminish
its stature and make its borders
less secure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.N.
Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon also forcefully
denounced the Syrian
regime, and its main backer, in
his last address
to the General Assembly.
BAN KI-MOON, United Nations
Secretary-General:
There is no military solution.
Many groups have killed many
innocents, none
more so than the government of
Syria, which
continues to bomb neighborhoods
and systematically
torture thousands of detainees.
Powerful patrons also have blood
on their
hands.
JUDY WOODRUFF: French President
Francois Hollande
added his own demand to stop the
killing in
Syria.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through
translator): The Syrian tragedy
will be seen
by history as a disgrace for the
international
community if we do not end it
quickly.
Thousands of children have died
in bombings.
Whole populations are starving.
Humanitarian convoys are being
attacked.
Chemical weapons are being used.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Turkey's
President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan joined those who called
for a solution
in Syria, but his main focus was
an exiled
cleric in the U.S., Fethullah
Gulen, whom
Erdogan and his government
accuse of fomenting
the failed July coup.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): I am calling, from
this podium,
to all of our friends to swiftly
take the
necessary measures against the
Gulenist terrorist
organization for their own
safety and the
future of their nations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The General
Assembly continues
through next Monday.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: New details
emerged on Ahmad Khan Rahami,
the suspect
in the New York and New Jersey
bombings.
The New York Times reported the
FBI briefly
investigated Rahami in 2014,
after he allegedly
stabbed his brother.
At the time, his father told
police that Rahami
was a -- quote -- "terrorist,"
but he later
recanted, and an investigation
found nothing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Authorities in
France have
made eight new arrests in a
deadly truck attack
in July; 86 people were killed
when a driver
plowed through crowds of
revelers in the Mediterranean
city of Nice on Bastille Day,
the French national
holiday.
The attacker, a Tunisian, was
killed by police.
The suspects arrested on Monday
are French
and Tunisian.
GWEN IFILL: The United Nations
has suspended
all aid deliveries to Syria
after an attack
on a Red Crescent convoy killed
at least 20
people.
It happened near the northern
city of Aleppo,
just hours after a cease-fire
expired.
Footage today showed the charred
wreckage
of trucks lining the streets,
and supplies,
some marked with the U.N. logo,
strewn about.
JENS LAERKE, U.N. Office for the
Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs: This is
a very, very
dark day for humanitarians in
Syria, and I
will say across the world,
because I think
there's been a moment of shock
and, frankly,
disgust by this attack.
GWEN IFILL: Russia denied claims
that its
warplanes attacked the convoy.
But it did say there is drone
footage showing
heavily armed militants
traveling with the
aid trucks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A fire roared
through a migrant
camp on the Greek island of
Lesbos overnight.
Thousands fled and no one was
injured, but
60 percent of the camp was
destroyed.
The fire broke out late Monday
and was extinguished
by midday today.
The camp houses several thousand
migrants.
Police say the fire started
after clashes
between different ethnic groups.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, Hillary
Clinton took a day off the trail
to study
up for next week's first
presidential debate,
while Donald Trump went back to
school.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump went to
college today,
courting the millennial vote.
At High Point University in
North Carolina,
he appeared to lecture Hillary
Clinton about
fighting terrorism.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Her claim that my opposition to
radical Islamic
terrorism is a recruiting tool.
But why?
Because I'm tough, it's a
recruiting tool?
It demonstrates a level of
ignorance about
the terror threat.
JOHN YANG: It came amid more
questions about
the charitable Trump Foundation.
The Washington Post reported it
paid more
than $250,000 to settle lawsuits
involving
his businesses.
The Trump campaign didn't
respond.
And social media became a
battleground over
Donald Trump Jr.'s tweet
likening Syrian refugees
to a tainted bowl of Skittles.
A Clinton campaign spokesman
called it disgusting,
and a former Obama speechwriter
tweeted a
picture that had earlier gone
viral, saying,
this Syrian boy is "one of the
millions of
children you compared to a
poisoned Skittle."
Clinton made no public
appearances today,
but there was word she may get
the vote of
a former Republican president.
Politico reported that former
Maryland Republican
Lieutenant Governor Kathleen
Kennedy Townsend,
daughter of the late Robert
Kennedy, posted
on Facebook that George H.W.
Bush had told
her he's voting for Hillary.
Today, a Bush spokesman said the
former president
is a private citizen and his
vote will be,
too, private.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Relief is on the
way for five
Southern states after a gasoline
pipeline
leak in Alabama.
Colonial Pipeline said today
that it's completed
a bypass line, and it can
restart the flow
tomorrow.
The leak has caused many gas
stations in the
region to shut down pumps.
And prices have jumped more than
20 cents
in some parts.
GWEN IFILL: Twenty-one states
went to federal
court today to block a new
overtime pay rule.
It takes effect December 1 and
requires overtime
for salaried workers making less
than $47,500.
That's double the current
threshold.
The states say it places a heavy
new burden
on state budgets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a slow day on
Wall Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nine
points to close near 18130.
The Nasdaq rose six, and the S&P
500 added
a fraction.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
new details
on abuse at a Marine training
camp; Tulsa
police promise justice after the
death of
an unarmed black man; breaking
down the presidential
candidates' plans on education;
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: The CEO of Wells
Fargo appeared
on Capitol Hill and faced a
barrage of questions
about the bank's conduct under
his leadership,
and why employees opened nearly
two million
phony accounts.
Regulators say employees, under
pressure to
meet sales goals, had secretly
created unauthorized
bank and credit card accounts
for customers,
since 2011, without their
knowledge.
Today, bank chairman John Stumpf
apologized
before the Senate Banking
Committee.
JOHN STUMPF, CEO, Wells Fargo &
Company: I
am deeply sorry that we failed
to fulfill
on our responsibility to our
customers, to
our team members and to the
American public.
We never directed, nor wanted
our team members
to provide products and services
to customers
that they didn't want.
That is not good for our
customers, and that
is not good for our business.
It is against everything we
stand for as a
company.
GWEN IFILL: More than 5,000
workers, mostly
lower-level, have been fired.
But senators on both sides of
the aisle said
it was Stumpf who should be
paying the price.
Massachusetts Democrat Elizabeth
Warren:
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN (D),
Massachusetts: So, you
haven't resigned.
You haven't returned a single
nickel of your
personal earnings.
You haven't fired a single
senior executive.
Instead, evidently, your
definition of accountable
is to push the blame to your
low-level employees
who don't have the money for a
fancy P.R.
firm to defend themselves.
It's gutless leadership.
You squeezed your employees to
the breaking
point, so they would cheat
customers and you
could drive up the value of your
stock and
put hundreds of millions of
dollars in your
own pocket.
And when it all blew up, you
kept your job.
You kept your
multimillion-dollar bonuses.
GWEN IFILL: We turn now to
Michael Corkery,
who's been reporting on the
story for The
New York Times.
Michael, you were in the room
today, in the
hearing chamber today, and you
saw the outrage
that was expressed by
Republicans and Democrats,
not just Elizabeth Warren, but
also David
Vitter.
Outrage is easy.
What's the fix that -- the fix
they're asking
for?
MICHAEL CORKERY, The New York
Times: Well,
I think they want more
accountability.
I mean, this fraud was
extraordinary for how
widespread it was.
I mean, it affected thousands of
customers.
We're talking upwards of two
million potentially
fake -- they created -- accounts
by Wells
Fargo employees; 5,300 bank
workers, mostly
low-level, low-paid bank workers
have been
fired, but I think what the
committee was
focused on and what Elizabeth
Warren in particular
was taking up the charge for was
that none
of the senior executives seem to
have been
affected, either losing their
jobs or taking
back some of their compensation.
GWEN IFILL: How long have senior
executives
known about this problem?
MICHAEL CORKERY: Well, John
Stumpf said he
knew -- he first knew about it
in 2013, though
the problems may have gone back
to 2011.
But even 2013, this problem has
been going
on for three years in some form
or another.
Those employees that have been
fired have
been fired over a period of five
years.
And, you know, even up to this
year, people
were being fired at the bank for
this behavior,
low-level workers.
So I think, again, the committee
was focused
on, why didn't you do more
sooner to take
care of this problem and get rid
of it?
GWEN FILL: Now, some employees
said that this
problem propped up because of a
culture of
competition at Wells Fargo.
What are they talking about?
MICHAEL CORKERY: Wells is a very
hard-driving
bank.
It's very successful, very
profitable.
Stock has been on a tear.
What they say is that employees
were under
these -- enormous pressure to
meet these sales
goals, to open as many new
accounts as they
can.
In fact, John Stumpf wanted all
bank customers
-- one of his goals was to have
every bank
customer have eight accounts,
eight products
with Wells Fargo.
It's an enormous amount of
products.
I mean, if you think, well, you
have got a
loan, or a checking account, a
savings account.
And so these employees thought
they were unrealistic.
They said they were totally
unrealistic.
And in order the meet them, not
just to gain
big bonuses, but just to keep
their jobs,
they felt compelled to meet
these.
And in order to do that, many of
these former
employees said they needed to
bend the rules,
they need to fake them.
GWEN IFILL: Is there a dollar
number you can
put on a number of accounts, the
dollar impact
on actual account holders who
found out that
they held a lot more accounts in
their name
than they realized?
MICHAEL CORKERY: Right now,
regulators, particularly
the CFPB, started by Elizabeth
Warren, has
put the number at about $2
million.
It's not a big number, when you
consider the
extent of the fraud.
And that's what's kind of weird
here, is that,
yes, these fees meant things to
people.
These were overdraft fees.
These were late fees on credit
cards they
didn't know they had.
But, again, it was happening in
ways where
sometimes a bank employee would
open up an
account for someone, the person
didn't know
it, and then two days later they
would close
it.
And they would just do it just
to get credit
for the sale.
And it suggests that this
selling culture
was so broken, that it wasn't
even making
the bank money.
It was just meeting goals for
the sake of
meeting goals.
GWEN IFILL: But some of the
sympathy in the
hearing today seemed to be for
employees who
were fired, who they think were
treated as
scapegoats?
MICHAEL CORKERY: Yes.
I think if -- they kept coming
back to this
point over and over, again,
5,000 employees.
And these are people mostly who
make about
$12 an hour.
Those are the ones who have been
fired.
At this point, other than the
few, as John
Stumpf said quite vaguely,
managers and managers
of managers, nobody in the C
suite, no big,
top executive has lost their
job.
And I think that has the optics
at least of
the little guy gets squeezed and
gets hurt
and takes the fall, and the big
CEOs get off.
GWEN IFILL: Michael Corkery of
The New York
Times, thank you very much.
MICHAEL CORKERY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn to the
revelations
of abuse at the Marine Corps
training facility
at Parris Island, South
Carolina.
An internal investigation that
began after
the death of a young recruit
earlier this
year has uncovered a larger
pattern of hazing
and abuse at the legendary
facility.
The "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham, who's recently
been reporting at Parris Island,
joins me
now for more.
So, William, tell us about this
investigation
that's been under way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As you
mentioned, this whole
investigation began when this
20-year-old
Marine recruit, he was a man
named Raheel
Siddiqui.
He was from Michigan.
He jumped off a third-floor
balcony and fell
to his death.
The investigation that went into
that death
revealed that he had been
physically abused
by one of his drill instructors.
He had had -- the morning that
he died, he
went out and claimed that he had
a sore throat
and asked for a medical -- to be
sent to the
doctor.
And his drill instructor
apparently didn't
believe him and made him run
laps up and down
the barracks when they were
sleeping.
He then apparently wasn't
responding to his
drill instructor appropriately,
and so he
was choked.
He fell to the ground.
And then his drill instructor
apparently got
over him and slapped him in the
face at least
once, perhaps three times, and
which he jumped
up at that point, ran out the
back door and
leapt off the balcony and fell
to his death.
Now, the Marines have ruled this
a suicide.
His family believes he was
targeted specifically
and was abused intentionally.
Apparently, this drill
instructor involved
in this had referred to this
young man as
a terrorist before.
The bigger thing that this
investigation has
revealed is that this particular
drill instructor
had been investigated prior to
this for another
instance of abuse on another
Muslim recruit
a year before, where he had
apparently called
this young man a terrorist also,
had put him
into a large commercial dryer,
and run that
dryer and burned the young
recruit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A clothes dryer?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A clothes
dryer, huge -- one
of these large industrial
dryers.
And so the family's argument --
and the Marines
say, why was this man reassigned
into this
case?
And so this investigation has
just continued
to unfold from there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you were
just at Parris
Island reporting on another
story just in
the last few weeks.
Did you see any evidence of this
kind of treatment
of these recruits?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: No, we saw
nothing of the
kind.
Producer Dan Sagalyn and I were
down there.
We were reporting a story about
how women
are now entering more combat
roles in the
Marine Corps.
And we were following some
female recruits.
And we saw no evidence of
anything like this.
We saw what a lot of civilians
would look
at as almost stereotypical
Marine drill sergeant
behavior.
It's rough and tough stuff,
drill sergeants
yelling at young recruits,
making them run
around, sometimes running to the
point of
exhaustion, a lot of chaos, a
lot of screaming.
But that's what the Marine Corps
thinks of
as its honored tradition of
turning civilian
into Corps.
So, we saw no evidence of abuse
whatsoever,
nothing that's alleged in this
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were telling
me that there
are still more allegations out
there about
the way recruits have been
treated by these
drill instructors.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's right.
This investigation, which hasn't
been released
to the public -- we went to the
Pentagon yesterday
to read it for a few hours.
This investigation revealed at
least a dozen
other drill instructors were
involved in what
the Marine Corps calls a
fostering of a culture
of abuse, so physically hitting
recruits,
encouraging other recruits to
hit other recruits,
choking of recruits, a real lack
of oversight
by officers looking into this.
It has blossomed into a much
larger investigation
in the Corps.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you mentioned
officers.
Who is being held accountable
for this at
this point?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, right
now, no one
has been criminally charged with
any wrongdoing
whatsoever.
Several people have been fired
or dismissed.
They have let go a colonel, a
lieutenant colonel
and a sergeant major.
But, right now, the Marine Corps
is still
trying to decide who should be
prosecuted,
who might face a court-martial,
what sort
of disciplinary action.
But there are at least 20
Marines who are
subject to possible further
sanction for their
actions in these cases.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You and I were
also discussing
the fact that, over years, there
have been
allegations made about what's
been going on
at Parris Island.
Have they changed their
techniques, the M.O.,
the way they operate in general
over time?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Marine
Corps would say,
yes, that they have been very
diligent about
this.
There was a notorious incident
back in the
'50s where a drill instructor
led a group
of recruits into a very
dangerous circumstance
and several died.
Reforms were made after that.
There were also a series of
reforms and training
made after the end of the
Vietnam era, when
we moved from a draft to a more
volunteer
army.
With regards to these particular
allegations,
the biggest concern that we
heard in talking
to current Marines and former
Marines is that
the leadership failed in their
job here, that
this type of abuse shouldn't
have been allowed
to fester and blossom the way it
did.
And that's really the most
damning part of
the investigation, is that the
supervisory
officers who should have been
observing this
activity really were absent and
negligent
of their duties.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is such a
disturbing story.
And I know the reporting on it
continues,
as well as the investigation.
William Brangham, thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: There are new calls
for a federal
investigation into the police
shooting of
an unarmed black man in Tulsa,
Oklahoma, raising
questions yet again about the
relationship
between law enforcement and
citizens of color.
Forty-year-old Terence Crutcher
was killed
on Friday when local officers
responded to
a call of a stalled vehicle in
the middle
of the road.
Police video subsequently showed
Crutcher,
hands in the air, walking away
from the officers
before police fired.
Here is some of that video.
MAN: That looks like a bad dude,
too.
MAN: I think he may have just
been Tasered.
WOMAN: Shots fired!
MAN: We have shots fired.
We have one suspect down.
GWEN IFILL: An attorney for the
officer said
she believed Crutcher was armed
and didn't
heed instruction.
But attorneys for the family say
the video
proves otherwise, and they
believe the officer
who shot him, Betty Jo Shelby,
should be charged
with murder.
She is on paid administrative
leave.
His twin sister, Tiffany, noted
that officers
watching at a distance from a
helicopter could
be heard on tape referring to
her brother
as a "bad dude."
TIFFANY CRUTCHER, Sister of
Terence Crutcher:
That big, bad dude was my twin
brother.
That big, bad dude was a father.
That big, bad dude was a son.
That big, bad dude was enrolled
at Tulsa Community
College, just wanting to make us
proud.
GWEN IFILL: For the latest on
the investigation
and the mood in the city of
Tulsa, I am joined
by Ginnie Graham, columnist for
the Tulsa
World Newspaper.
Ginnie Graham, The Washington
Post keeps a
database now in which they say,
in the past
year, 696 people, 172 of them
black men, have
been fatally shot by police.
In Tulsa, how did this come
about?
GINNIE GRAHAM, Tulsa World: This
particular
incident, some of that is
unfolding.
We know that he had a stalled
car and that
the officer, Betty Shelby, was
responding
to a different call and came
upon him.
The problem is, there is some
missing video
-- or not missing video -- there
was no video
leading up to what we now see.
And it's pretty clear that he
had his hands
up.
And you can see other officers
responded.
Then you had the aerial view.
And he was shot.
He was Tasered and then shot.
And so people are coming to
their own conclusions
watching the video, and other
people have
lingering questions about what
led up to that,
how he responded, and then how
the officers
responded directly after that,
because he
was left on the street.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
He was left on the street for
some time.
Was there -- is there a
distinction or a dispute
between what the police account
of the incident
is and what others are saying?
GINNIE GRAHAM: Not so much right
now.
The police aren't saying too
much.
They are launching their own
investigation.
And they will be returning those
results over
to the district attorney, who
will decide
on a charge.
But there is also another
investigation going
on.
The police chief had called the
Justice Department
early on, and the U.S. attorney
is looking
into this as an independent and
parallel investigation
to see if there are any federal
civil rights
violations that occurred.
And so he will be releasing
those results
at the same time.
GWEN IFILL: We got to see this
video relatively
quickly, more quickly than we
often see in
these cases.
Do you think what happened in
Tulsa with the
police rapid response, or
relatively rapid
response, is the result of what
we have seen
happen in other cities and other
places?
GINNIE GRAHAM: It could be.
There are also efforts
throughout the year
to talk about race in Tulsa.
We have had a dubious history of
dealing with
race issues.
And so for the last decade or
two decades,
there have been various groups
to try to forge
relationships in between these
tense times.
And so this is going to be a
challenge for
the city's leaders on how they
move forward.
But I think the other cities and
how they
have dealt with that are
certainly a caution.
But there's also a call for
transparency to
get the information out quickly,
put it out
to the public, and then we can
make decisions
from there on what -- if they
acted correctly.
GWEN IFILL: When you talk about
Tulsa's dubious
history, you're referring not
only to instances
where there have been
police-involved shootings,
but going all the way back to
1921, right?
GINNIE GRAHAM: Exactly.
We had an infamous 1921 race
riot, and it
burned a section of the city to
the ground.
And it was the part of the city
referred to
as Black Wall Street.
And for decades, that wound was
left to fester.
That part of town was never
rebuilt.
The families were never given
any sort of
help to rebuild.
And it was only in the 1990s
that a commission
was established to investigate
what happened
during that time.
And since then, there is the
John Hope Reconciliation
Center that holds a national
forum on race.
There are other groups in the
city that hold
seminars, symposiums, dialogues
and talks.
But all of that is going to be
tested right
now, as I said, because, right
now, people
are upset.
They're grieving.
They're angry.
And so how the city responds,
whether they're
going to be straightforward,
going to live up to their
promises, that's
what's going to determine the
relationships
from here on out.
So, hopefully, our city has
learned some lessons
on how to heal, how to deal with
this in a
peaceful, yet justful manner.
GWEN IFILL: Well, and it should
be said that,
right up until now, we haven't
seen riots
or unrest or fires or looting,
have we?
GINNIE GRAHAM: Not in Tulsa.
And we have had a couple
incidents before
where, last year, we had our
county deputy
sheriff, a reserve officer, shot
and killed
an unarmed black man as well.
And our district attorney filed
charges in
that with a secondary
manslaughter conviction.
So, there is some history that
our city leaders
will do the right thing.
And there have been calls from
the family
and from other leaders to be
patient, but
yet, you know, keep up the
oversight, because
protests are more than welcome.
Our city -- our police chief
even said he
invites protesters.
They came into the press
conference.
The hope is that they can remain
peaceful
and that we can sit down and
have this discussion
about, you know, how can we be
safe on our
streets and how can we build
trust that people
that are living in North Tulsa
and all over
Tulsa feel safe with the police
that are on
the streets and find out what
happened and
to act swiftly.
GWEN IFILL: Ginnie Graham,
columnist for the
Tulsa World, thank you very
much.
GINNIE GRAHAM: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": Ken
Burns' newest
film about a couple who dared to
defy the
Nazis; and the overlooked
challenges of first-generation
college students.
But, first, our coverage of the
issues in
this presidential campaign
continues.
And we're taking the opportunity
to focus
on where they stand on
education, as part
of our weekly series Making the
Grade.
Correspondent Lisa Desjardins
gets us started
with this primer.
LISA DESJARDINS: It is a wide
education gap.
The candidates disagree not just
on how to
fix schools, but also on what
the problems
are.
First, Donald Trump.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
That's why I'm proposing a plan
to provide
school choice to every
disadvantaged student
in America.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Republican
wants a $12,000
voucher for every child living
in poverty.
DONALD TRUMP: That means parents
will be able
to send their kids to the
desired public,
private, or even religious
school of their
choice.
LISA DESJARDINS: Here's Trump's
math; $12,000
times 11 million kids, that's
over $130 billion.
To pay for that, Trump would
kick in $20 billion
in federal funds, and he'd like
states to
find the rest, over $100
billion.
Libertarian Gary Johnson has
long pushed for
vouchers, but he is to the right
of Trump
on something else.
He would close the Department of
Education
and send savings back to the
states.
Hillary Clinton, on the other
hand, strongly
opposes vouchers, charging that
Trump's plan
would gut public school funding.
One of her biggest changes would
be for even
younger kids, a universal
preschool plan that
was part of her campaign launch
last year.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Our country won't be competitive
or fair if
we don't help more families give
their kids
the best possible start in life.
LISA DESJARDINS: Another
contrast, the Common
Core education standards.
Trump regularly touts his full
opposition.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
terminate Common
Core out of Washington.
We're going to bring our
education local.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton doesn't
talk Common
Core much, but she does support
it.
Instead, her marquee education
plan is about
a different rung.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: We came
up with a
plan that makes public college
tuition-free
for working families and
debt-free for everyone.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton's idea,
inspired
in part by former opponent
Bernie Sanders,
is threefold.
One, she'd make in-state
universities tuition-free
for families earning less than
$125,000.
Two, community college would be
tuition-free
for everyone.
And, three, she'd address those
who have to
pay now.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: If you
already have
debt, we will help you refinance
it and pay
it back as a percentage of your
income, so
you're never on the hook for
more than you
can afford.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton would
raise taxes
on the wealthy to pay for her
college plans.
The Green Party's Jill Stein
would go further
and erase all student debt with
a kind of
government bailout.
In contrast, Trump has no
specific plans for
college costs, though, in a
Twitter video,
he did criticize the
government's role in
student lending.
The candidates hit nearly
opposite education
issues, even as they fight for
the same student
and parent votes.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: Now Jeffrey Brown
looks more deeply
into the differences between the
two major
nominees on education.
JEFFREY BROWN: And for that, we
turn to two
journalists who cover this
closely.
Andrew Ujifusa is with our
partners at Education
Week.
Scott Jaschik is the editor of
Inside Higher
Education.
Welcome to both of you.
Andrew, let me start with you.
And let's start with K through
12 and these
differences over vouchers and
school choices.
School choice, dramatic
differences.
ANDREW UJIFUSA, Education Week:
Yes, very
dramatic differences.
Recently, Donald Trump proposed
a $20 billion
federal school choice program,
which a lot
of conservatives like.
It's not entirely clear how that
would work
in many instances, but it does
have the backing
of many Republicans.
Clinton very much opposed to it.
I think we should keep in mind
here that the
two national teachers unions,
which very closely
back Clinton and have for some
time, they
are very much opposed to
vouchers as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because they're
historically
worried about its implications
for public
education.
ANDREW UJIFUSA: Yes, that's
exactly right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is it clear how
Donald Trump
would pay for this?
ANDREW UJIFUSA: No, he has not
made that clear.
He has not said, for example,
where the money
would come from within the
federal government.
I don't think he wants to raise
taxes to pay
for his school choice program.
That wouldn't go over well with
fellow Republicans.
But a lot of the details about
that program
are still unclear.
JEFFREY BROWN: And with Hillary
Clinton, she
has expressed in the past some
support for
charter schools, right, but
where is she?
What is she saying these days?
ANDREW UJIFUSA: That is a very
good question.
It's hard to say.
I think, in the past, it's fair
to say she's
been more supportive of charter
schools.
But ever since she hit the 2016
campaign trail,
she has voiced more concerns
about charter
schools, such as the type of
students they
enroll.
Again, that might reflect a lot
of the concerns
that teachers unions have about
charters.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then let me
stay with you
for the question of Common Core,
because there,
again, you have Donald Trump,
who has referred
to it as a disaster.
I think he's pretty clear.
ANDREW UJIFUSA: Yes.
Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Hillary Clinton,
measured support?
Where would you put the two of
them right
now?
ANDREW UJIFUSA: I think she does
support the
standards.
She doesn't talk a lot about it.
I think concerns with the Common
Core on the
Democratic side mostly have to
do with tests
that are connected to the Common
Core.
The unions have a lot of
concerns about those
tests and how they're used.
Donald Trump has made it very
clear he doesn't
like the Common Core.
That reflects in particular the
position of
the Republican base.
He has not explained why he
thinks it's a
bad idea.
He has said that he will get rid
of the Common
Core, but there's no real clear
avenue for
him to do that if he's elected.
JEFFREY BROWN: Scott Jaschik,
where do you
see, when you're looking at K
through 12,
the kind of school reform
movement that we
have watched over the many years
now?
Where do you see these two
candidates?
SCOTT JASCHIK, Inside Higher
Education: I
see the two candidates on school
reform and
actually a bit on higher ed
reform in the
same place.
Barack Obama very much embraced
school reform,
innovation, online education,
new ways of
delivering education.
Hillary Clinton, a little more
skeptical,
and I think that relates to her
being close
to the teachers unions, as we
were talking
about.
Donald Trump, aside from a few
speeches, has
not given much detail at all.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, take us now
more directly
into the higher ed part,
because, here, Hillary
Clinton has taken a real strong
position,
right, with her idea for free
public higher
education for many.
SCOTT JASCHIK: Correct.
She's proposing that everyone be
entitled
to free public tuition at public
colleges
in their home state if you're
from family
incomes up to $125,000.
That covers more than 80 percent
of the population.
She would give grants to states
to distribute
to the universities, which the
states would
have to match $1 for $3, so that
there would
be money to replace the lost
tuition revenue.
JEFFREY BROWN: And this one
comes with a big
price tag, I saw, $500 million.
SCOTT JASCHIK: It's a lot of
money, and she
has said that increased taxes on
wealthier
Americans would pay for it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, what about
Donald Trump?
How much has he said -- he has
-- well, he
has said less, I know, in this
area.
SCOTT JASCHIK: He's said very
little.
I have had two interviews with
one of his
top advisers, who has described
a desire to
reform the student loan system
to have banks
and colleges mutually decide who
is creditworthy.
He has also opposed the free
public tuition,
public higher education tuition,
and also
opposed President Obama's free
community college
plan.
JEFFREY BROWN: You were telling
me just before
we started something
interesting, that a lot
of people in the higher
education community
are focused on Donald Trump for
what he said
about integration, even more
than anything
he said about -- specifically
about education.
SCOTT JASCHIK: Right.
He's gone through several
iterations, but
he says he wants to make it much
more difficult
for people to get a visa to come
to the United
States for a variety of
purposes, including
to study.
This worries U.S. academic
leaders, who want
and need foreign students.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Andrew, when
you look at
the education -- you have been
following this
throughout the campaign -- are
you surprised
by how much or how little
attention it has
gotten and in what forms it's
gotten?
ANDREW UJIFUSA: I can't say I'm
surprised.
Education is never a top-tier
issue, you know,
in the election.
And I think that's particularly
true this
go-around.
I think that we should have
expected that
Donald Trump would bring up the
Common Core
because it is such a hot-button
topic, particularly
in the Republican base.
It's also important to keep in
mind that we
have a new federal education law
that President
Obama signed at the end of last
year that
sort of has taken education off
the front
burner for now in several ways.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is the Every
Student Succeeds,
right, Act that picked up on the
No Child
Left Behind.
So, that was a big deal just a
year ago.
ANDREW UJIFUSA: It was a big
deal.
It remains to be a big deal.
And it returns a lot of the
control over several
key policy decisions to states
and districts.
So there's a little bit less for
Washington
to do.
And states and other folks are
still figuring
out what exactly it means.
JEFFREY BROWN: Scott, what do
you see when
you look broadly at the campaign
and how much
this has gotten...
SCOTT JASCHIK: I think we are
going to hear
more about Clinton's higher
education plan.
Her aides clearly see this as
something that
will reach middle-class voters.
Many middle-class families are
deeply concerned
about paying for their
children's college.
And, likewise, many people in
academia worry
about the future of public
higher education,
as states have in many ways
walked away from
their historic obligations.
JEFFREY BROWN: And do you expect
to hear more
from Donald Trump as well?
SCOTT JASCHIK: I doubt we will
see or hear
more from Donald Trump.
One challenge he has is that,
when he talks
about education, people talk
about Trump University.
And while that's not really
typical of higher
education, I don't think his
aides view that
as a positive topic of
discussion.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, an
issue to be continued
in the campaign.
Scott Jaschik and Andrew
Ujifusa, thank you
both very much.
ANDREW UJIFUSA: Thank you.
SCOTT JASCHIK: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: We have compiled the
candidates'
stances on education into a
handy reference
chart.
You can find that on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new Ken Burns
documentary
airs tonight on PBS, and for
this story, he
co-directs with another
filmmaker for whom
the details are very personal.
I talked with the men at the
United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum about
the cloak
and dagger story behind "Defying
the Nazis:
The Sharps' War."
ACTOR: A telephone rang, and it
was probably
the most momentous telephone
call that I ever
received.
I knew whose voice it was, the
voice of my
closest friend, Everett Baker.
He said, "Waitstill, Martha, I
am inviting
you to undertake the first
intervention against
evil by the denomination to be
started immediately
overseas."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with that
call in 1939,
the life of unitarian minister
Waitstill Sharp
and his wife, Martha, would
never be the same,
nor would the world.
The Sharps, who lived in
Wellesley, Massachusetts,
were sent by their church to
lead a secret
and perilous rescue of refugees
and dissidents
in Europe before and after the
start of World
War II.
They directly helped over 100
people escape
and had a part in helping over
2,000 people
avoid deportation to Nazi death
camps.
They expected to be gone for
several months,
and instead were gone two years.
MORDECAI PALDIEL, Holocaust
Scholar: They
were motivated from the
beginning to go out
there into the kingdom of hell
and try to
get some people out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They left two
young children
at home.
Artemis Joukowsky is the
grandson of the Sharps,
and son of the Martha Sharp who
was named
after her courageous mother.
Artemis, this really has been
almost a lifelong
project for you, since you were,
what, in
high school?
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY, "Defying the
Nazis: The
Sharps' War": Yes, I was in
ninth grade, and
I was given an assignment to
interview someone
of moral courage.
And I went home and I said to my
mom, "Who
should I interview?"
She said: "Talk to your
grandmother.
She did some cool things during
World War
II."
And that interview changed my
life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What was it that
she shared
with you?
I mean, obviously, you were
young.
You were -- but she shared
something with
you that stayed.
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What was it?
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: I think a
love for people,
a love for difference, a love
for celebrating
what is good in the world and
what makes the
world so rich.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ken, you have so
many different
film ideas to choose from.
What was it about this story?
KEN BURNS, "Defying the Nazis:
The Sharps'
War": You know, this is a story
that chose
me.
I didn't start this project.
It was started years and years
ago by Artemis.
And he brought it to me.
And I looked at the germ of the
story.
And I was so stunned, that I had
to drop everything.
It's its these two lone figures
in the face
of this gigantic tidal wave of
the greatest
cataclysm in human history, the
Second World
War.
And what happens is, is that
cataclysm becomes
so big that it's undefinable.
We say six million Jews, and we
can't actually
personalize it in a way.
So, here was an opportunity, a
kind of back
door, a stage door to go through
these two
extraordinary, but improbable
heroes, courageous
people who are throwing us, the
audience,
into an espionage story, a spy
story.
I mean, this is a story of
courage, but also
of sacrifice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In fact, the more
he dug for
documents, the more complicated
and interesting
the story became.
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: I didn't even
know what
I had.
And then, over the next 15
years, and working
with Ken's team, we have now
begun to create
not just the story of what we're
sharing with
the world, but an archive that
is all over
the world.
We have archives now in France,
in Germany,
in the Czech Republic that are
connected to
our collections.
We have discovered over 200,000
documents
that are now archived here at
the museum.
And what's extraordinary is how
the documents
come alive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you also lost
a lot of
documents, because documents,
thousands, millions
of pages had to be burned to
keep them from
the Nazis.
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: Yes, exactly.
Yes.
What is so remarkable about this
project is
how many people are coming
forward today saying,
the Sharps helped us in this
way.
We have documents that show the
Sharps helped
us.
And this very large network of
underground,
you know, rescuers, both the
Jewish community,
the Protestant community, the
Catholic community,
others who saw rescue as
something that they
had to do for their faith.
KEN BURNS: What he'd sent was
this diamond
in the rough.
And you realize that the story
was everything,
and that you can always find a
way to tell
a story.
If there's no pictures, then you
find the
documents.
If there are no documents, then
you find the
pictures, or you get live
cinematography,
or you do something.
NARRATOR: Dr. Otto Meyerhof, the
Jewish Nobel
Prize-winning biochemist, who
was hiding out
in a small coastal village north
of...
JUDY WOODRUFF: To that end, some
of those
rescued are portrayed in the
film through
narration and photos.
Lion Feuchtwanger, a
German-Jewish novelist
and playwright, is one:
ACTOR: Why are you here doing
what you're
doing?
ACTOR: I'm just as capable of
the many sins
of human nature as anyone else,
but I believe
that the will of God is to be
interpreted
by the liberty of the human
spirit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are
interviews with those
who are still alive, like
Rosemarie Feigl
of Vienna.
ROSEMARIE FEIGL, Holocaust
Survivor: My father
went from consulate to consulate
trying to
get visas to go anywhere that
was plausible.
That's how he met Martha Sharp,
who saved
my life.
And my mother just packed my
things.
Martha gave us all beige berets,
and there
are pictures of us in those
beige berets.
ACTRESS: We realized that we
were in the front
lines against Nazism.
Waitstill looked at me and,
holding my hand
tightly, whispered, "Courage."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you have a
sense of what,
for her, was the hardest, the
scariest moment?
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: I think
facing up to a
Nazi official, knowing that this
could be
death.
I think negotiating with people
who she viewed
in her mind as being not
connected to human
reality.
I think she felt afraid for
everyone she tried
to help.
I think that notion of this
being just a drop
in the bucket of how many people
could have
been saved, I think she lived
with that pain
and that regret all her life.
This story is not just about
celebrating their
lives.
It's an instruction manual for
what -- how
we need to operate today as
people and as
civilizations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, at the same
time, as Ken
said, there was a personal toll
on your family,
on your mother.
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: Yes.
Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there was
some suggestion
that the project is an effort to
do some healing.
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
that?
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: I think it
happened.
I think my mother saw the film
in the last
month, as we're getting ready to
share this
with the world.
And she said, it's brilliant.
And she understands how she felt
as a child.
We portray her in the film as a
vulnerable
child, just as the children my
grandmother
was rescuing.
KEN BURNS: It has something that
is universal
to it.
And that's what I love.
You see in action, particularly
today, where
we're wrestling in our own
country with what
direction we want to take, do we
wish to go
this way or do we wish to go
that way, that
these people opened their
hearts.
He could give a sermon every
Sunday.
He could minister to the common
problems of
his parishioners.
And then, all of a sudden, he's
in Nazi-occupied
Prague, suddenly learning how to
launder money.
And she's trying to escape the
Gestapo tail.
And you suddenly realize, but
this is all
true.
ARTEMIS JOUKOWSKY: Right.
KEN BURNS: It is all true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Towards the end,
the film shows
the Sharps' daughter, Martha
Sharp Joukowsky,
aided by Rosemarie Feigl,
lighting the Eternal
Flame at Holocaust Remembrance
Center, Yad
Vashem.
It was 10 years ago when the
Sharps were honored
as the Righteous Among the
Nations.
They are two of only five
Americans honored
among 25,000 people with that
distinction.
The documentary airs tonight on
PBS stations.
Check local listings.
And Artemis Joukowsky has just
published a
companion book about this story
as well.
GWEN IFILL: We close with an
essay.
Novelist Jennine Capo Crucet
grew up in Miami
and attended Cornell University
in Upstate
New York.
In addition to adjusting to the
cold, Jennine
learned to navigate campus as a
first-generation
college student.
Tonight, she shares thoughts on
why colleges
need to do better at welcoming
students like
her.
JENNINE CAPO CRUCET, Author,
"Make Your Home
Among Strangers": It took me
going away to
college to learn that, by doing
so, I would
become something called a
first-generation
college student.
This means I was the first in my
family to
go to college, but it also meant
I had no
idea how much I didn't know.
For instance, my family stuck
around for all
of freshman orientation because
the paperwork
about move-in day didn't
explicitly state
when they should leave, so we
assumed they
need to be there the whole week.
Long after other families had
taken off, mine
was still following me around as
I registered
for classes or during the
school-mandated
swim test.
I was glad to have them there,
but it did
make for some awkward meals in
the dining
hall.
Aside from going to class, I had
no road map
for what I was supposed to do as
a newly minted
college student.
I navigated those first weeks by
carefully
watching what I thought of as
real students,
those whose parents had gone to
college, who'd
gotten a lifelong rundown of
what was in store.
That's how I knew to wear
flip-flops in the
shower or to take notes in class
or that visits
to the writing center were
covered by tuition.
But there was still a lot I
couldn't figure
out this way.
For instance, I dropped a class
after realizing
the textbooks would cost a
couple hundred
dollars.
By the time I learned that
professors often
put books on course reserve, it
was too late
to add it back that semester, or
like when
my professors kept saying, "See
me in office
hours," as if we all knew what
that meant.
But it took a bad grade on a
paper for him
to explain to me what office
hours were, that
he was just waiting around in
one place, ready
to answers all my questions.
What could my college have done
to show me
how much I needed to know
without making me
feel dumb or out of my league in
the process?
This is where well-meaning
administrators
usually start throwing around
the word mentorship.
But too many colleges still
think of mentoring
as just meetings between two
people, one who
knows some stuff and another who
doesn't yet
know that stuff.
Technically, I had a mentor my
first year
in college, but when I finally
met him, he
didn't seem to understand how
confused I was,
in part because he came from a
long line of
college-going folks.
He didn't know how much I didn't
know either.
Formal mentors like the one my
college assigned
me need to be first-generation
college students
themselves or have been trained
by people
intimately familiar with the
challenges students
like me faced.
They need to do more than send
us concerned
e-mails:.
They need to knock on our
literal doors.
And they should be compensated
for their work
as mentors, not asked to
volunteer or serve
out of some sense of obligation
to help out
a past version of themselves.
They need to be concretely
valued for the
resource they are, for the
unique survival
skills they bring to campus.
I now work as a novelist and,
believe it or
not, a professor.
Whenever I'm in front of a group
of new readers
or students, I ask those who
identify as first-generation
college people to raise their
hands.
I then congratulate them.
I tell them how much it means to
me to meet
them, and I tell them that I'm
one of them.
But, later, after whatever talk
or lecture
I have given, there's almost
always someone
who comes up to me and admits
they didn't
raise their hand because they
didn't know
being a first-generation college
student was
a fact they could be proud of.
Only then do I admit to them
something I know
that they don't: When I was in
their place,
I wouldn't have raised my hand
either.
GWEN IFILL: You can find more of
our essays
on our Web site at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Essays.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a news update
before we
go.
It's being reported tonight that
federal prosecutors
have filed terrorism charges
against Ahmad
Khan Rahami, the suspect in the
New York and
New Jersey bombings.
They include use of a weapon of
mass destruction
and destruction of property.
Rahami also faces charges of
attempted murder
for his shoot-out with police.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in later
tonight.
On "Charlie Rose," lead singer
Bono of U2
joins Charlie as the band
celebrates its 40th
year.
Hmm, 40th year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hard to believe.
GWEN IFILL: I wouldn't know.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.